Proposal to update GTFS Schedule to RFC 2119 (#277)
google/transit: gtfs/spec/en/reference.md

1.  [Document Conventions](#document-conventions)
2.  [Dataset Files](#dataset-files)

> 3.  [File Conventions](#file-conventions)

Reviewer: RFC 2119 provides words "used to signify the requirements in the specification" which according to the title are "Key words ... to Indicate Requirement Levels". Is there a reason we should stop calling these requirements and start calling them conventions? I think the word "conventions" is better suited for the following paragraph that lists the key words (where it is already used).

Author: Good point. Reverting to "File Requirements" works for me.

### Field Types

- **Color** - A color encoded as a six-digit hexadecimal number. Refer to [https://htmlcolorcodes.com](https://htmlcolorcodes.com) to generate a valid value (the leading "#" must not be included). <br> *Example: `FFFFFF` for white, `000000` for black or `0039A6` for the A,C,E lines in NYMTA.*
- **Currency code** - An ISO 4217 alphabetical currency code. For the list of current currency, refer to [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_4217#Active\_codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_4217#Active_codes). <br> *Example: `CAD` for Canadian dollars, `EUR` for euros or `JPY` for Japanese yen.*

> - **Date** - Service day in the YYYYMMDD format. Since time within a service day can be above 24:00:00, a service day may contain information for the subsequent day(s). <br> *Example: `20180913` for September 13th, 2018.*

Author: Should be "Since time within a service day may..."

|  `agency_name` | Text | **Required** | Full name of the transit agency. |
|  `agency_url` | URL | **Required** | URL of the transit agency. |
|  `agency_timezone` | Timezone | **Required** | Timezone where the transit agency is located. If multiple agencies are specified in the dataset, each must have the same `agency_timezone`. |
|  `agency_lang` | Language code | Optional | Primary language used by this transit agency. Should be provided to help GTFS consumers choose capitalization rules and other language-specific settings for the dataset. |

> |  `agency_phone` | Phone number | Optional | A voice telephone number for the specified agency. This field is a string value that presents the telephone number as typical for the agency's service area. It can and should contain punctuation marks to group the digits of the number. Dialable text (for example, TriMet's "503-238-RIDE") is permitted, but the field must not contain any other descriptive text. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|  `agency_phone` | Phone number | Optional | A voice telephone number for the specified agency. This field is a string value that presents the telephone number as typical for the agency's service area. It may and should contain punctuation marks to group the digits of the number. Dialable text (for example, TriMet's "503-238-RIDE") is permitted, but the field must not contain any other descriptive text. |
```

Reviewer 3: Should we pick either "may" or "should" here? Does "should" imply "may"?

Author: "Should" and "may" have different purposes as defined by [RFC 2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119). "Should" denotes a recommendation (_recommendation_ for the GTFS data producer to do something) and "may" denotes that the item is optional and identifiable as OK by a validator (phone numbers containing punctuation marks are _permitted_). This sentence has both, but they have different purposes. IMHO we should define the spec first by its behavior, so if we were to pick one I would keep "may". But both are ok to have.

|  Field Name | Type | Presence | Description |
|  ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |
|  `stop_id` | ID | **Required** | Identifies a location: stop/platform, station, entrance/exit, generic node or boarding area (see `location_type`). <br><br>Multiple routes may use the same `stop_id`. |
|  `stop_code` | Text | Optional | Short text or a number that identifies the location for riders. These codes are often used in phone-based transit information systems or printed on signage to make it easier for riders to get information for a particular location. The `stop_code` may be the same as `stop_id` if it is public facing. This field should be left empty for locations without a code presented to riders. |

> |  `stop_name` | Text | **Conditionally Required** | Name of the location. Names should be meaningful to local and tourist vernacular.<br><br>When the location is a boarding area (`location_type=4`), the `stop_name` should contains the name of the boarding area as displayed by the agency. It could be just one letter (like on some European intercity railway stations), or text like “Wheelchair boarding area” (NYC’s Subway) or “Head of short trains” (Paris’ RER).<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** for locations which are stops (`location_type=0`), stations (`location_type=1`) or entrances/exits (`location_type=2`).<br>- Optional for locations which are generic nodes (`location_type=3`) or boarding areas (`location_type=4`).|

Reviewer 4: Maybe we should (probably in a separate PR) also clarify "local and tourist". For example in places where the local alphabet is non latin the only way to provide useful information to tourists is to have a latin (probably but not necessarily English) transciption.

Author: I agree. I may be wrong but I think `translations.txt` came after this description was written. An update would be useful with some guidance on dealing with cases such as the one you're describing. Would you like to open this topic as an issue?

> |  `stop_name` | Text | **Conditionally Required** | Name of the location. Names should be meaningful to local and tourist vernacular.<br><br>When the location is a boarding area (`location_type=4`), the `stop_name` should contains the name of the boarding area as displayed by the agency. It could be just one letter (like on some European intercity railway stations), or text like “Wheelchair boarding area” (NYC’s Subway) or “Head of short trains” (Paris’ RER).<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** for locations which are stops (`location_type=0`), stations (`location_type=1`) or entrances/exits (`location_type=2`).<br>- Optional for locations which are generic nodes (`location_type=3`) or boarding areas (`location_type=4`).|

Reviewer: "meaningful to ... vernacular" does not seem like idiomatic English, so cannot be substituted for "in the ... vernacular". The expression "tourist vernacular" is a little hard to interpret anyway in the original spec. A possible alternative is "Names should be understandable to both local residents and tourists".

Author: I chose the word "meaningful" as a substitute for "will understand" to indicate that names should represent stops according to how people ("locals" and "tourists") associate names with place. That is to say, not only should the name be legible, but it should reflect what the stop is conventionally called. 

The suggested alternative to "Names should be understandable to both local residents and tourists" might be too ambiguous IMHO, as it may only allude to legibility and localization for different audiences (but say nothing about producing "meaningful" names).

@flocsy also [raised the point](https://github.com/google/transit/pull/277#discussion_r646094801) that we should add a note about the use of `translations.txt` along the lines of "local and tourist" (perhaps a separate issue).

Reviewer: I can see why you might want to replace "understand" with some other word, but my sense is that the revised version of the sentence is not grammatically correct, specifically the expression "meaningful to ... vernacular". Perhaps the whole sentence should be rewritten once a clearer meaning is agreed upon, and perhaps without using the word "vernacular". As mentioned in other comments below about time fields, this change seems out of scope in a PR described as being about RFC 2119 terms. I'm not insisting on PRs being purely single-subject, but if a PR does include additional changes it seems important to mention those in the description or title.

Author: I agree that this needs more attention, and that it is a separate topic from RFC. I reverted it to the original for now.

|  `tts_stop_name` | Text | Optional | Readable version of the `stop_name`. See "Text-to-speech field" in the [Term Definitions](#term-definitions) for more. |

> |  `stop_desc` | Text | Optional | Description of the location that provides useful, quality information. Must not contain a duplicate of `stop_name`.|

Reviewer: "Must not contain" is different than "must not simply duplicate". This changes the meaning of the document rather than just clarifying the term "must".

Author: Good catch. Maybe we can edit this to:
> Must not be a duplicate of `stop_name`.

|  `stop_lon` | Longitude | **Conditionally Required** | Longitude of the location.<br><br>For stops/platforms (`location_type=0`) and boarding area (`location_type=4`), the coordinates must be the ones of the bus pole — if exists — and otherwise of where the travelers are boarding the vehicle (on the sidewalk or the platform, and not on the roadway or the track where the vehicle stops). <br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** for locations which are stops (`location_type=0`), stations (`location_type=1`) or entrances/exits (`location_type=2`).<br>- Optional for locations which are generic nodes (`location_type=3`) or boarding areas (`location_type=4`). |
|  `zone_id` | ID | **Conditionally Required** | Identifies the fare zone for a stop. If this record represents a station or station entrance, the `zone_id` is ignored.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** if providing fare information using [fare_rules.txt](#fare_rulestxt) <br>- Optional otherwise.|
|  `stop_url` | URL | Optional | URL of a web page about the location. This should be different from the `agency.agency_url` and the `routes.route_url` field values. |

> |  `location_type` | Enum | Optional | Location type. Valid options are:<br><br>`0` (or blank) - **Stop** (or **Platform**). A location where passengers board or disembark from a transit vehicle. Is called a platform when defined within a `parent_station`.<br>`1` - **Station**. A physical structure or area that contains one or more platform.<br>`2` - **Entrance/Exit**. A location where passengers can enter or exit a station from the street. If an entrance/exit belongs to multiple stations, it may be linked by pathways to both, but the data provider must pick one of them as parent.<br>`3` - **Generic Node**. A location within a station, not matching any other `location_type`, that may be used to link together pathways define in pathways.txt.<br>`4` - **Boarding Area**. A specific location on a platform, where passengers can board and/or alight vehicles.|

Author: Note
> that may be used to link together pathways

should probably be reverted to:

> that can be used to link together pathways

since it is describing an ability to do something and not a RFC permission/possibility.

> |  `parent_station` | ID referencing `stops.stop_id` | **Conditionally Required** | Defines hierarchy between the different locations defined in `stops.txt`. It contains the ID of the parent location, as followed:<br><br>- **Stop/platform** (`location_type=0`): the `parent_station` field contains the ID of a station.<br>- **Station** (`location_type=1`): this field must be empty.<br>- **Entrance/exit** (`location_type=2`) or **generic node** (`location_type=3`): the `parent_station` field contains the ID of a station (`location_type=1`)<br>- **Boarding Area** (`location_type=4`): the `parent_station` field contains ID of a platform.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** for locations which are entrances (`location_type=2`), generic nodes (`location_type=3`) or boarding areas (`location_type=4`).<br>- Optional for stops/platforms (`location_type=0`).<br>- Forbidden for stations (`location_type=1`).|

Reviewer 3: Should we add "must" in _Stop/platform_, _Entrance_ and _Boarding area_ sections of `stops.parent_station`?

Author: Can you give a suggestion of what this would look like, or has this been resolved?

|  `agency_id` | ID referencing `agency.agency_id` | **Conditionally Required** | Agency for the specified route.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** if multiple agencies are defined in [agency.txt](#agency). <br>- Optional otherwise.   |
|  `route_short_name` | Text | **Conditionally Required** | Short name of a route. Often a short, abstract identifier (e.g., "32", "100X", "Green") that riders use to identify a route. Both `route_short_name` and `route_long_name` may be defined.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** if `routes.route_long_name` is empty.<br>- Optional otherwise. |
|  `route_long_name` | Text | **Conditionally Required** | Full name of a route. This name is generally more descriptive than the `route_short_name` and often includes the route's destination or stop. Both `route_short_name` and `route_long_name` may be defined.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Required** if `routes.route_short_name` is empty.<br>- Optional otherwise. |

> |  `route_desc` | Text | Optional | Description of a route that provides useful, quality information. Must not be a duplicate of `route_short_name` or `route_long_name`. <hr> _Example: "A" trains operate between Inwood-207 St, Manhattan and Far Rockaway-Mott Avenue, Queens at all times. Also from about 6AM until about midnight, additional "A" trains operate between Inwood-207 St and Lefferts Boulevard (trains typically alternate between Lefferts Blvd and Far Rockaway)._ |

Reviewer 5: This looks too strict. I suggest to say "should not" here.

Numerous feeds that are consumed by Google do have this notice and they are considered valid.

A route that has the same `route_desc` and `route_short_name` or `route_long_name` may be still served to the end user, so this is not an error. In fact, many consumers may just ignore route_desc completely.

See also my patch to Validator:
https://github.com/MobilityData/gtfs-validator/pull/917

Author: I've applied this suggestion to stop_desc as well. Thanks!

> |  `route_desc` | Text | Optional | Description of a route that provides useful, quality information. Must not contain a duplicate of `route_short_name` or `route_long_name`. <hr> _Example: "A" trains operate between Inwood-207 St, Manhattan and Far Rockaway-Mott Avenue, Queens at all times. Also from about 6AM until about midnight, additional "A" trains operate between Inwood-207 St and Lefferts Boulevard (trains typically alternate between Lefferts Blvd and Far Rockaway)._ |

Reviewer: "Must not contain" is different than "must not simply duplicate". This changes the meaning of the document rather than just clarifying the term "must".

Author: Same suggestion as above in `stop_desc`. Change "must not contain" to "must not be".

|  `route_text_color` | Color | Optional | Legible color to use for text drawn against a background of `route_color`. Defaults to black (`000000`) when omitted or left empty. The color difference between `route_color` and `route_text_color` should provide sufficient contrast when viewed on a black and white screen. |
|  `route_sort_order` | Non-negative integer | Optional | Orders the routes in a way which is ideal for presentation to customers. Routes with smaller `route_sort_order` values should be displayed first. |
|  `continuous_pickup` | Enum | Optional | Indicates that the rider can board the transit vehicle at any point along the vehicle’s travel path as described by `shapes.txt`, on every trip of the route. Valid options are: <br><br>`0` - Continuous stopping pickup. <br>`1` or empty - No continuous stopping pickup. <br>`2` - Must phone agency to arrange continuous stopping pickup. <br>`3` - Must coordinate with driver to arrange continuous stopping pickup.  <br><br>Values for `routes.continuous_pickup` will be overriden by values defined in `stop_times.continuous_pickup` for specific `stop_time`s along the route. |

> |  `continuous_drop_off` | Enum | Optional | Indicates that the rider can alight from the transit vehicle at any point along the vehicle’s travel path as described by `shapes.txt`, on every trip of the route. Valid options are: <br><br>`0` - Continuous stopping drop off. <br>`1` or empty - No continuous stopping drop off. <br>`2` - Must phone agency to arrange continuous stopping drop off. <br>`3` - Must coordinate with driver to arrange continuous stopping drop off. <br><br>Values for `routes.continuous_drop_off` will be overriden by values defined in `stop_times.continuous_drop_off` for specific `stop_time`s along the route. |

Reviewer 4: 1. typo: "overriden" => "overridden" (needs 2 "d"-s) (you have it in 2 places)

Author: Good catch. I will make the corrections.

> |  `continuous_drop_off` | Enum | Optional | Indicates that the rider can alight from the transit vehicle at any point along the vehicle’s travel path as described by `shapes.txt`, on every trip of the route. Valid options are: <br><br>`0` - Continuous stopping drop off. <br>`1` or empty - No continuous stopping drop off. <br>`2` - Must phone agency to arrange continuous stopping drop off. <br>`3` - Must coordinate with driver to arrange continuous stopping drop off. <br><br>Values for `routes.continuous_drop_off` will be overriden by values defined in `stop_times.continuous_drop_off` for specific `stop_time`s along the route. |

Reviewer 4: 2. maybe it should be "may be overridden" instead of "will be overridden"? I understand that if there's a stop_times.continuous_drop_off then it WILL override the value in routes.continuous_drop_off, but the language everywhere else is about the possibilities of the editor, so IMHO "may be" is better.

Author: I have to agree that the language/perspective I chose is a bit confusing. I think if when we're speaking of "possibilities of the editor" we should use "can" to denote the ability of doing something. Meanwhile "may" should be used for defining RFC permissions/possibility (i.e., behavior of the spec as a computer would see it).

Author: I propose the following:
> Values for < field > can be overridden by defining values in < field >...

Author: Please see my suggestion applied in the most recent changes in the "Files changed" tab. Feel free to provide a second review

> |  `continuous_drop_off` | Enum | Optional | Indicates that the rider can alight from the transit vehicle at any point along the vehicle’s travel path as described by `shapes.txt`, on every trip of the route. Valid options are: <br><br>`0` - Continuous stopping drop off. <br>`1` or empty - No continuous stopping drop off. <br>`2` - Must phone agency to arrange continuous stopping drop off. <br>`3` - Must coordinate with driver to arrange continuous stopping drop off. <br><br>Values for `routes.continuous_drop_off` can be overridden by defining values in `stop_times.continuous_drop_off` for specific `stop_time`s along the route. |

Reviewer: Should "can be overridden" be replaced with "may be overridden"?

|  `route_id` | ID referencing `routes.route_id` | **Required** | Identifies a route. |
|  `service_id` | ID referencing `calendar.service_id` or `calendar_dates.service_id` | **Required** | Identifies a set of dates when service is available for one or more routes. |
|  `trip_id` | ID | **Required** | Identifies a trip. |

> |  `trip_headsign` | Text | Optional | Text that appears on signage identifying the trip's destination to riders. Should be used to distinguish between different patterns of service on the same route.<br><br> If the headsign changes during a trip, values for `trip_headsign` will be overridden by values defined in `stop_times.stop_headsign` for specific `stop_time`s along the trip. |

Reviewer 4: If the headsign changes during a trip, values for `trip_headsign` MAY be overridden by values defined in `stop_times.stop_headsign` for specific `stop_time`s along the trip.

Author: Similar to above, we should use "can" to denote an ability of doing something IMHO (i.e., the original description). Using "may" to describe the behavior of the spec makes this part seem like its optional for the consumer to implement this feature, when really it is a required feature of the spec.

> |  `trip_headsign` | Text | Optional | Text that appears on signage identifying the trip's destination to riders. Should be used to distinguish between different patterns of service on the same route.<br><br> If the headsign changes during a trip, values for `trip_headsign` can be overridden by defining values in `stop_times.stop_headsign` for specific `stop_time`s along the trip. |

Reviewer: "can be overridden" should be "may be overridden" or "should be overridden"

|  `trip_short_name` | Text | Optional | Public facing text used to identify the trip to riders, for instance, to identify train numbers for commuter rail trips. If riders do not commonly rely on trip names, `trip_short_name` should be empty. A `trip_short_name` value, if provided, should uniquely identify a trip within a service day; it should not be used for destination names or limited/express designations. |

> |  `direction_id` | Enum | Optional | Indicates the direction of travel for a trip. This field should not be used in routing; it provides a way to separate trips by direction when publishing time tables. Valid options are: <br><br>`0` - Travel in one direction (e.g. outbound travel).<br>`1` - Travel in the opposite direction (e.g. inbound travel).<hr>*Example: The `trip_headsign` and `direction_id` fields could be used together to assign a name to travel in each direction for a set of trips. A [trips.txt](#tripstxt) file could contain these records for use in time tables:* <br> `trip_id,...,trip_headsign,direction_id` <br> `1234,...,Airport,0` <br> `1505,...,Downtown,1` |

Reviewer: "may be used together" instead of "could be used together".  Also the following sentence may be clearer if it starts with "For example trips.txt could contain"...

|  `continuous_drop_off` | Enum | Optional | Indicates that the rider can alight from the transit vehicle at any point along the vehicle’s travel path as described by `shapes.txt`, from this `stop_time` to the next `stop_time` in the trip’s `stop_sequence`. Valid options are: <br><br>`0` - Continuous stopping drop off. <br>`1` or empty - No continuous stopping drop off. <br>`2` - Must phone agency to arrange continuous stopping drop off. <br>`3` - Must coordinate with driver to arrange continuous stopping drop off. <br><br>If this field is populated, it overrides any continuous drop-off behavior defined in `routes.txt`. If this field is empty, the `stop_time` inherits any continuous drop-off behavior defined in `routes.txt`. |

> |  `shape_dist_traveled` | Non-negative float | Optional | Actual distance traveled along the associated shape, from the first stop to the stop specified in this record. This field specifies how much of the shape to draw between any two stops during a trip. Must be in the same units used in [shapes.txt](#shapestxt). Values used for `shape_dist_traveled` must increase along with `stop_sequence`; they must not be used to show reverse travel along a route.<hr>*Example: If a bus travels a distance of 5.25 kilometers from the start of the shape to the stop,`shape_dist_traveled`=`5.25`.*|

Reviewer: The meaning of the sentence "they must not be used to show reverse travel along a route" is not clear, but changes here would be off-topic and should perhaps be made in a separate PR.

Author: I agree that the sentence about reverse travel is not clear. The description is clear in the first sentence why values must increase (i.e., "actual distance traveled"). Nonetheless, I think "they must not be used to show reverse travel along a route" is still a valid statement here?

Reviewer: Yes, I think the pair of sentences "must increase" / "must not be used" reads well. Clarification could be handled some other time.

> |  Field Name | Type | Presence | Description |

Reviewer 2: Should this set of modifications also clarify that "the end_date date must not precede the start_date date"? Or would this happen in a separate PR?

Author: Noted for a separate PR.

File: **Conditionally Required**

> The [calendar_dates.txt](#calendar_datestxt) table explicitly activates or disables service by date. It can be used in two ways.

Author: Should be "It may be used in two ways". The implication is that these are the only two ways the file may be used. Using "can" implies even more uses.

* Alternate: Omit [calendar.txt](#calendartxt), and specify each date of service in [calendar_dates.txt](#calendardatestxt). This allows for considerable service variation and accommodates service without normal weekly schedules. In this case `service_id` is an ID.

|  Field Name | Type | Presence | Description |
|  ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |
|  `service_id` | ID referencing `calendar.service_id` or ID | **Required** | Identifies a set of dates when a service exception occurs for one or more routes. Each (`service_id`, `date`) pair may only appear once in [calendar_dates.txt](#calendar_datestxt) if using [calendar.txt](#calendartxt) and [calendar_dates.txt](#calendar_datestxt) in conjunction. If a `service_id` value appears in both [calendar.txt](#calendartxt) and [calendar_dates.txt](#calendar_datestxt), the information in [calendar_dates.txt](#calendardatestxt) modifies the service information specified in [calendar.txt](#calendartxt). |
|  `date` | Date | **Required** | Date when service exception occurs. |

> |  `exception_type` | Enum | **Required** | Indicates whether service is available on the date specified in the date field. Valid options are:<br><br> `1` - Service has been added for the specified date.<br>`2` - Service has been removed for the specified date.<hr>*Example: Suppose a route has one set of trips available on holidays and another set of trips available on all other days. One `service_id` corresponds to the regular service schedule and another `service_id` corresponds to the holiday schedule. For a particular holiday, the [calendar_dates.txt](#calendar_datestxt) file can be used to add the holiday to the holiday `service_id` and to remove the holiday from the regular `service_id` schedule.* |

Reviewer 6: "may" instead of "can"?

Author: I suppose this case is defining a *permission of the spec* in the context of the example, so I agree.

> |  `exception_type` | Enum | **Required** | Indicates whether service is available on the date specified in the date field. Valid options are:<br><br> `1` - Service has been added for the specified date.<br>`2` - Service has been removed for the specified date.<hr>*Example: Suppose a route has one set of trips available on holidays and another set of trips available on all other days. One `service_id` corresponds to the regular service schedule and another `service_id` corresponds to the holiday schedule. For a particular holiday, the [calendar_dates.txt](#calendar_datestxt) file may be used to add the holiday to the holiday `service_id` and to remove the holiday from the regular `service_id` schedule.* |

Reviewer: RFC2119 is about clarifying requirements, but the conditionals here were inside an example, rather than being requirements in the specification. Removing the conditionals can give the impression that there is only one way to represent the example in GTFS. I would rephrase this whole example as "For example, suppose a route... This could be represented with one service_id for the regular schedule..." however this change might be out of scope for the current PR and should perhaps be done in a separate PR.

Author: Great insight around RFC 2119 and examples. We can revert the proposed changes and dedicate any clarifications to a separate PR, as suggested.

> |  `exception_type` | Enum | **Required** | Indicates whether service is available on the date specified in the date field. Valid options are:<br><br> `1` - Service has been added for the specified date.<br>`2` - Service has been removed for the specified date.<hr>*Example: Suppose a route has one set of trips available on holidays and another set of trips available on all other days. One `service_id` could correspond to the regular service schedule and another `service_id` could correspond to the holiday schedule. For a particular holiday, the [calendar_dates.txt](#calendar_datestxt) file can be used to add the holiday to the holiday `service_id` and to remove the holiday from the regular `service_id` schedule.* |

Reviewer 6: Shouldn't it be "may" instead of "can"?

Author: This section is tricky because it's describing a hypothetical usage of the fields via an example. I am tending towards "could" being okay here and even reverting the final "can" back to "could" to be consistent with the tense. 

@lionel-nj Put it elegantly. As a quick reference:
- Can - Ability to do something (i.e., scenarios, usage)
     - Example: riders ability do to things -> can; e.g. _“riders can reach a customer service…”_
- May - Permission/possibility (i.e., spec)
     - Example: restrictions from the specification -> may; e.g. _“The `stop_code` may be the same as `stop_id` if it is public facing.”_

Author: Please see a revised suggestion in the "Files changed" tab. Feel free to provide a second review.

|  `price` | Non-negative float | **Required** | Fare price, in the unit specified by `currency_type`. |
|  `currency_type` | Currency code | **Required** | Currency used to pay the fare. |
|  `payment_method` | Enum | **Required** | Indicates when the fare must be paid. Valid options are:<br><br>`0` - Fare is paid on board.<br>`1` - Fare must be paid before boarding. |

> |  `transfers` | Enum | **Required** | Indicates the number of transfers permitted on this fare. Valid options are:<br><br>`0` - No transfers permitted on this fare.<br>`1` - Riders can transfer once.<br>`2` - Riders can transfer twice.<br>empty - Unlimited transfers are permitted. |

Reviewer: Why is the word "can" substituted for "may" here? The change is the reverse of what's being done elsewhere in the document. These words are describing what the rider is allowed to do, not requirement levels in the specification so they are not really covered by RFC 2119. If the intent is to _avoid_ confusion with the meaning of "optional" given in RFC 2119, I suggest we use the words "is permitted" or "is allowed".

Author: Good point. Since this is explicit about "the rider", perhaps we can keep "may".

|  `field_name` | Text | **Required** | Name of the field to be translated. Fields with type `Text` may be translated, fields with type `URL`, `Email` and `Phone number` may also be “translated” to provide resources in the correct language. Fields with other types should not be translated. |
|  `language` | Language code | **Required** | Language of translation.<br><br>If the language is the same as in `feed_info.feed_lang`, the original value of the field will be assumed to be the default value to use in languages without specific translations (if `default_lang` doesn't specify otherwise).<hr>_Example: In Switzerland, a city in an officially bilingual canton is officially called “Biel/Bienne”, but would simply be called “Bienne” in French and “Biel” in German._ |
|  `translation` | Text or URL or Email or Phone number | **Required** | Translated value. |

> |  `record_id` | ID | **Conditionally Required** | Defines the record that corresponds to the field to be translated. The value in `record_id` should be a main ID of the table, as defined below:<br><br>- `agency_id` for `agency.txt`<br>- `stop_id` for `stops.txt`;<br>- `route_id` for `routes.txt`;<br>- `trip_id` for `trips.txt`;<br>- `trip_id` for `stop_times.txt`;<br>- `pathway_id` for `pathways.txt`;<br>- `level_id` for `levels.txt`;<br>- `attribution_id` for `attribution.txt`.<br><br>Fields in tables not defined above should not translated. However producers sometimes add extra fields that are outside the official specification and these unofficial fields may be translated. Below is the recommended way to use `record_id` for those tables:<br><br>- `service_id` for `calendar.txt`;<br>- `service_id` for `calendar_dates.txt`;<br>- `fare_id` for `fare_attributes.txt`;<br>- `fare_id` for `fare_rules.txt`;<br>- `shape_id` for `shapes.txt`;<br>- `trip_id` for `frequencies.txt`;<br>- `from_stop_id` for `transfers.txt`.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Forbidden** if `table_name` is `feed_info`.<br>- **Forbidden** if `field_value` is defined.<br>- **Required** if `field_value` is empty. |

Reviewer 2: Does the following make sense?

```suggestion
|  `record_id` | ID | **Conditionally Required** | Defines the record that corresponds to the field to be translated. The value in `record_id` should be a main ID of the table, as defined below:<br><br>- `agency_id` for `agency.txt`<br>- `stop_id` for `stops.txt`;<br>- `route_id` for `routes.txt`;<br>- `trip_id` for `trips.txt`;<br>- `trip_id` for `stop_times.txt`;<br>- `pathway_id` for `pathways.txt`;<br>- `level_id` for `levels.txt`;<br>- `attribution_id` for `attribution.txt`.<br><br>Fields in tables not defined above should not translated. However producers may sometimes add extra fields that are outside the official specification and these unofficial fields may be translated. Below is the recommended way to use `record_id` for those tables:<br><br>- `service_id` for `calendar.txt`;<br>- `service_id` for `calendar_dates.txt`;<br>- `fare_id` for `fare_attributes.txt`;<br>- `fare_id` for `fare_rules.txt`;<br>- `shape_id` for `shapes.txt`;<br>- `trip_id` for `frequencies.txt`;<br>- `from_stop_id` for `transfers.txt`.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Forbidden** if `table_name` is `feed_info`.<br>- **Forbidden** if `field_value` is defined.<br>- **Required** if `field_value` is empty. |
```

> |  `record_id` | ID | **Conditionally Required** | Defines the record that corresponds to the field to be translated. The value in `record_id` should be a main ID of the table, as defined below:<br><br>- `agency_id` for `agency.txt`<br>- `stop_id` for `stops.txt`;<br>- `route_id` for `routes.txt`;<br>- `trip_id` for `trips.txt`;<br>- `trip_id` for `stop_times.txt`;<br>- `pathway_id` for `pathways.txt`;<br>- `level_id` for `levels.txt`;<br>- `attribution_id` for `attribution.txt`.<br><br>Fields in tables not defined above should not translated. However producers sometimes add extra fields that are outside the official specification and these unofficial fields may be translated. Below is the recommended way to use `record_id` for those tables:<br><br>- `service_id` for `calendar.txt`;<br>- `service_id` for `calendar_dates.txt`;<br>- `fare_id` for `fare_attributes.txt`;<br>- `fare_id` for `fare_rules.txt`;<br>- `shape_id` for `shapes.txt`;<br>- `trip_id` for `frequencies.txt`;<br>- `from_stop_id` for `transfers.txt`.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Forbidden** if `table_name` is `feed_info`.<br>- **Forbidden** if `field_value` is defined.<br>- **Required** if `field_value` is empty. |

Reviewer 2: Should this be as follows:

"The value in `record_id` should be a main ID of the table, as defined" -> "The value in `record_id` must be a main ID of the table, as defined..."

Author: I think making the first 8 `id` fields for the official tables defined as requirements ("must") is good. 

How would the recommended `id` fields for unofficial tables be handled in a validator? A warning in all cases that an "unofficial" `id` is present and an error if none of the `id`s described in this description are present?

Reviewer 2: @barbeau please correct me if I'm wrong. As of now the gtfs-validator does not support yet the validation of conditionally required fields. 
However, this could be handled as follows:
- if `table_name` is feed_info, and `record_id` is defined: that is an ERROR;
- if `field_value` is defined,  and `record_id` is defined: that is an ERROR;
- if `field_value` is defined, and `record_id` is not defined: that is an ERROR.
⬆️ these would apply to both official and unofficial tables. 

Now, when it comes to a situation when an ERROR from the previous step was not generated - in the case of an unofficial table:

>  A warning in all cases that an "unofficial" id is present

Yes - but I'd like to discuss this further during our next technical meeting. That encompasses a broader feature to be added: conditional requirements.

Author: I committed a change to make the official files "must" as described above.

|  `field_value` | Text or URL or Email or Phone number | **Conditionally Required** | Instead of defining which record should be translated by using `record_id` and `record_sub_id`, this field can be used to define the value which should be translated. When used, the translation will be applied when the fields identified by `table_name` and `field_name` contains the exact same value defined in field_value.<br><br>The field must have **exactly** the value defined in `field_value`. If only a subset of the value matches `field_value`, the translation won’t be applied.<br><br>If two translation rules match the same record (one with `field_value`, and the other one with `record_id`), the rule with `record_id` takes precedence.<br><br>Conditionally Required:<br>- **Forbidden** if `table_name` is `feed_info`.<br>- **Forbidden** if `record_id` is defined.<br>- **Required** if `record_id` is empty. |

### feed_info.txt

File: **Optional** (**Required** if `translations.txt` is provided)

> The file contains information about the dataset itself, rather than the services that the dataset describes. Note that, in some cases, the publisher of the dataset may be a different entity than any of the agencies.

Reviewer 6: "can" instead of "may"?

Author: Since this is referring to "usage" around who a publisher can be, I agree.

> The file contains information about the dataset itself, rather than the services that the dataset describes. Note that, in some cases, the publisher of the dataset can be a different entity than any of the agencies.

Reviewer: I find this reads better with the "is". This is not really related to RFC 2119 but if we're editing for clarity I'd keep "is" and remove the superfluous "Note that":
```suggestion
The file contains information about the dataset itself, rather than the services that the dataset describes. In some cases, the publisher of the dataset is a different entity than any of the agencies.
```

|  Field Name | Type | Presence | Description |
|  ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |
|  `feed_publisher_name` | Text | **Required** | Full name of the organization that publishes the dataset. This may be the same as one of the `agency.agency_name` values. |
|  `feed_publisher_url` | URL | **Required** | URL of the dataset publishing organization's website. This may be the same as one of the `agency.agency_url` values. |

> |  `feed_lang` | Language code | **Required** | Default language used for the text in this dataset. This setting helps GTFS consumers choose capitalization rules and other language-specific settings for the dataset. The file `translations.txt` can be used if the text needs to be translated into languages other than the default one.<br><br>The default language may be multilingual for datasets with the original text in multiple languages. In such cases, the `feed_lang` field should contain the language code `mul` defined by the norm ISO 639-2. A translation for each language used in the dataset should be provided in `translations.txt`. If all the original text in the dataset is in the same language, then `mul` should not be used.<hr>_Example: Consider a dataset from a multilingual country like Switzerland, with the original `stops.stop_name` field populated with stop names in different languages. Each stop name is written according to the dominant language in that stop’s geographic location, e.g. `Genève` for the French-speaking city of Geneva, `Zürich` for the German-speaking city of Zurich, and `Biel/Bienne` for the bilingual city of Biel/Bienne. The dataset `feed_lang` should be `mul` and translations would be provided in `translations.txt`, in German: `Genf`, `Zürich` and `Biel`; in French: `Genève`, `Zurich` and `Bienne`; in Italian: `Ginevra`, `Zurigo` and `Bienna`; and in English: `Geneva`, `Zurich` and `Biel/Bienne`._ |

Reviewer 4: The file `translations.txt` MAY be used...

Author: IMHO it should be "can" since it is describing the ability of the GTFS producer to do something (use `translations.txt`) and not a permission for optional behaviour (RFC "may").
